# Continual learning with Simulation-Driven Differentiable Active Learning (SDDAL) framework for efficient phase retrieval data generation

In the initial commit to this Continual-SDDAL repository, an original SDDAL (Simulation-Driven Differentiable Active Learning) framework was pushed into this repository. The following instructions are about how to run different functionalities in the initially committed SDDAL. After the continual learning researcher is familiar with the initially committed original SDDAL, she will proceed to develop an continual learning scheme inside the SDDAL framework based on the initially pushed SDDAL code base.

# Data and folder preparation

Before running any experiments, the following folder structure must be prepared.

1, Six design folders must be created to contain the intensity and phase in both png images and numpy array files generated by the simulation in SDDAL, the Zernike coefficients used by the simulation to generate the corresponding intensity and phase, the uncertainty maps produced by the Quantile UNet-T model in the SDDAL, and the trained network weights of the Quantile UNet-T model everytime it is retrained on the accumulated training set:
- `Design_rec`
- `Design_ring`
- `Design_chair`
- `Design_gaussian`
- `Design_hat`
- `Design_tear`

Each design folder must share the same internal structure, shown below:

```text
Design_rec/
├── latest_uncertainty/
├── models/
├── training_set/
│   ├── intensity/
│   │   ├── img/
│   │   └── npy/
│   └── phase/
│   │   ├── img/
│   │   └── npy/
│   └── zernikes/
│
└── test_set/
    ├── intensity/
    │   ├── img/
    │   └── npy/
    └── phase/
    │   ├── img/
    │   └── npy/
    │
    └── zernikes/
```

2, For each beam shape, the corresponding test set must be copy-pasted from the original [Processed InShaPe dataset](https://doi.org/10.6084/m9.figshare.30131893.v4) to the test_set subfolder of the corresponding design folder above.

3, To this point, you can already run the SDDAL framework to generate data into the design folder. When you have generated enough data, you will need to officially train an UNet-T model or Quantile UNet-T model on the design-finished training dataset, then test the trained model on the InShaPe test set. To store inference results on test set, another six result folders must be created:
- `rec_result`
- `ring_result`
- `chair_result`
- `gaussian_result`
- `hat_result`
- `tear_result`

Each result folder must share the same internal structure, shown below:

```text
rec_result/
├── Phi_pred/
│   ├── img/
│   └── npy/
├── Phi_gt/
│   ├── img/
│   └── npy/
└── I_gt/
    ├── img/
    └── npy/
```

# Reproduce the designed dataset from the optimally designed Zernike coefficients officially released by the authors

The optimally designed Zernike coefficients underlying and responsible for the experiment results to be officially reported in the publication for this research will be released in a FigShare repository to be publicly available. Here we provide the handy tool to reproduce the entire designed dataset (intensity maps and phase maps) following the folder structure of this repository in good order.

The Zernike coefficients should all reside in the following subfolder in each corresponding design folder:

- `Design_rec/training_set/zernikes/`

Then run the following command and the intensity maps and phase maps will be reproduced from the Zernike coefficients:

Command:
  
  ```text
  python3 dataset_reproducer.py --gpu 0 --beamshape rec
  ```

# Reproduce baseline training dataset of "Prior Distribution Sampling"

One of the major baseline dataset we will compare our SDDAL-generated dataset with in our publication is a training set created from randomly sampling respective Zernike coefficients from their known prior distribution, which is a uniform distribution in range \[-1.5, 1.5\]

# Running SDDAL framework for dataset design

The entire pipeline of the simulation-driven differentiable active learning framework is organized in a Shell script (SDDAL.sh), which launches and recycles several implemented python modules periodically including:

- `Initializer.py`: responsible for generating initial training samples from Z<-(-1.5, 1.5) by indicating the number of training samples you desire
- `Trainer.py`: responsible for training the Quantile UNet-T model on the current accumulated training data. After training the Quantile UNet-T will be able to output both predicted phase map and the uncertainty map for it
- `Scanner.py`: responsible for doing batched gradient descent on the PBF-LB/M beam shaping simulation docking its output to the input of the trained weight-frozen Quantile UNet-T with optimization objective as Quantile uncertainty maximum.
- `zernike_statistics.py`: responsible for plotting KDE and histogram curves of the Zernike coefficients found out by SDDAL framework to generate the training dataset.
- `M290_MachineSimu_GPU/M290_full_scene.py`: the differentiable batched Pytorch on-GPU simulation, with Direct Integration as Convolution (DIC) as diffractive propagator, of the PBF-LB/M beam shaping system of the EOS M290 additive manufacturing machine in [EU InShaPe project](https://inshape-horizoneurope.eu/).

The external arguments of the shell script SDDAL.sh are:
```text
bash Neural_Experimental_Design.sh <beamshape> <lr> <initial_size> <init_only?> <start_round> <end_round> <gpu> <scanner_batch_size> <retrain_frequency> <scan_only?>
```

- 1, Quick experiment: Execute the following commands in sequence.
  
  Command:
  
  ```text
  bash SDDAL.sh rec 0.0002 1000 true 9999 9999 0 9999 9999
  ```
  
   - (1) Create 1000 initial samples by randomly sampling Zernike coefficients from uniform(-1.5, 1.5).

  Command:
  
  ```text
  bash SDDAL.sh rec 9999 9999 false 1 200 0 5 9999 true
  ```
   
   - (2) Train a Quantile UNet-T model on the 1000 initial samples.

   - (3) SDDAL uses the PBF/LB-M beam shaping simulation and trained Quantile UNet-T for uncertainty sampling to generate 1000 active learned samples.

   - (4) The 1000 initial samples + 1000 active learned samples is the final 2000-sample training set.

  Command:
  
  ```text
  python3 train_unet.py --data Design_rec --epochs 15 --batch_size 2 --gpu 0 --lr 0.0002 --step_size 2 --seed 123 --pth_name rec.pth.tar
  ```

   - (5) Train a randomly initialized UNet-T model on the final 2000-sample training set (GPU data)

  Command:
  
  ```text
  python3 train_unet.py --data Design_rec --batch_size 2 --gpu 1 --seed 123 --pth_name rec.pth.tar --val_vis_path rec_result --eval
  ```

   - (6) Test on the InShaPe test set (CPU data).

- 2, Official dataset design: Design a dataset with a fixed GPU
 
  Command:
  
  ```text
  bash SDDAL.sh rec 0.0002 100 false 342 1000 1 5 1 false
  ```
  
   - (1) Create 100 initial samples by randomly sampling Zernike coefficients from uniform(-1.5, 1.5).
 
   - (2) Train a Quantile UNet model on the 100 initial samples.
 
   - (3) SDDAL uses the PBF/LB-M beam shaping simulation and trained Quantile UNet-T for uncertainty sampling with batched-sample generation size 5 to generate 5 active learned samples to be added into the 100 initial samples.
 
   - (4) Retrain the Quantile UNet model on the current_size+5 accumulated samples with the identical randomly initialized network weights to the first time training on 100 initial samples.
 
   - (5) Go back to step (3) and repeat step (3) and (4) until the numer of samples generated satisfies your requirements (in this example, it asks for 5000 training samples in total).

  Command:

  ```text
  python3 train_unet.py --data Design_rec --epochs 15 --batch_size 2 --gpu 0 --lr 0.0002 --step_size 2 --seed 123 --pth_name rec.pth.tar
  ```

   - (6) Train a randomly initialized UNet-T model on the final 2000-sample training set (GPU data)

  Command:

  ```text
  python3 train_unet.py --data Design_rec --batch_size 2 --gpu 1 --seed 123 --pth_name rec.pth.tar --val_vis_path rec_result --eval
  ```

   - (7) Test on the InShaPe test set (CPU data).

- 3, Official dataset design: Design a dataset with two GPUs switched between each other at certain 2 points of time everyday

    First, open the file "GPU_scheduler.sh", locate line47-55 to set all arguments for the SDDAL pipeline you want to run, e.g., beam shape, learning rate, etc; again locate line59-61 to set the hours and minutes when the pipeline will be moved from GPU1 to GPU0 and when it will be moved from GPU0 to GPU1. Save the changes and run the following command
 
  Command:

  ```text
  nohup bash GPU_scheduler.sh > rec_GPU_scheduled.txt 2>&1 &
  ```

    The GPU-switched SDDAL pipeline can automatically determine how many samples the currently running SDDAL has generated, kill the current SDDAL, and restart a same SDDAL on the other GPU but directly resuming from all the samples that have been accumulatively generated.

- 4, Official dataset design: resume generation from where it stopped last time

    `GPU_scheduler.sh + SDDAL_GPU_scheduled.sh` will automatically determine how many samples have been generated and resume from there. When first time run SDDAL, there is no sample generated yet, then `GPU_scheduler.sh + SDDAL_GPU_scheduled.sh` will automatically determine that entire SDDAL will be started from scratch.

  However, if you use `SDDAL.sh` and you wish to resume the data generation process from where it stopped last time, you need to look into the corresponding `Design_beamshape` folder by yourself to figure out how many samples have been generated and accumulated in the design folder. Then you just set the parameter `<start_round>` of `SDDAL.sh` as the integer `(num_sample_already_generated/scanner_batchsize)` and run the `SDDAL.sh`.


# Evaluate the performance of the generated training dataset

- 1, Manual operation of single test jobs

    - (1), Train UNet-T model from scratch on the generated training set. As already indicated in the previous section, for any generated dataset residing in any design folder, you should run the following command to train UNet-T on it:
    ```text
    python3 train_unet.py --data Design_rec --epochs 15 --batch_size 2 --gpu 0 --lr 0.0002 --step_size 2 --seed 123 --pth_name rec.pth.tar
    ```
    - (2), Test trained UNet-T model on InShaPe (CPU) test set. As already indicated in the previous section, you should run the following command for inference on test set:
    ```text
    python3 train_unet.py --data Design_rec --batch_size 2 --gpu 1 --seed 123 --pth_name rec.pth.tar --val_vis_path rec_result --eval
    ```
    - (3), The predicted phase map, the ground-truth phase map, and the ground-truth intensity are stored in ./rec_result for RecTophat shape for example. Now switch into the result folder:
    ```text
    cd ./rec_result/
    ```
    - (4), Inside the result folder you will see a Python script named "FRCM.py", please create a new folder named "diff" in the current directory, and then run the following command then the phase prediction accuracy metrics MAE, SSIM, FRCM will be written in the generated evaluation.txt, you will also have KDE distribution of the metrics across the test set:
    ```text
    nohup python3 FRCM.py > evaluation.txt 2>&1 &
    ```
    - (5), Now switch back to the root directory of this project. Then switch into the folder "Active_Curve":
    ```text
    cd ../Active_Curve/
    ```
    - (6), Establish the folders to contain inference results of training UNet-T on different numbers of samples, then run the following command to launch all sample-variant trainings simultaneously:
    ```text
    bash TrainSet_curve.sh rec 0.0002
    ```
    In the end, you need to do step (4) for all result folders of the launched sample-variant trainings, collect results, and plot the active curve by yourself (shouldn't be too difficult.).

- 1, bash operation of all test jobs you indicate launching to the background on a dedicated test server (a different machine more suitable for FRCM computation than your mainframe, i.e., main server, where SDDAL itself runs)
  - (1), On your mainframe, train UNet-T model from scratch on the generated training set with different number of training samples in order of generated from earlier to later:

    First please switch into the Acc-NumSamp retrain curve working directory:
    
    ```text
    cd Active_Curve
    ```
    
    Determine a list of number of samples you want to train the UNet-T on from scratch. Open the file `TrainSet_curve_sddal.sh` and revise line15 to be the list of number you desire. For example the following line15 of `TrainSet_curve_sddal.sh` indicates that I want to train UNet-T on 100 samples, 200 samples, 300 samples, 400 samples, 600 samples, 700 samples, 800 samples, and 900 samples, respectively:
    
    ```text
    samples=(200 300 700 1000 400 500 800 900)
    ```

    Go to line24 of `TrainSet_curve_sddal.sh` to indicate that in all the training jobs you wanted above, the first how many items in the list above do you want to put on GPU0, and the rest will be put on GPU1. Therefore, when setting this number you should consider load balancing between the 2 GPUs with respect to number of training samples and number of jobs. The example I gave above is a rather good balance.

    All set, now you can run the following command to train UNet-T from scratch on different number of generated samples for a specific beam shape. The evaluation (inference) results on the test set of the corresponding beam shape will be automatically done at the end of each training. The test set inference results will be stored in the folders like the one I have given as example `rec_100`. Please establish such folders for each number of training samples and each beam shapes you want to test by naming the established folder as `beamshape_NumSamp`. Don't forget to indicate the initial learning rate for the beam shape you will train as the second argument of `TrainSet_curve_sddal.sh`, and run:

    Command:
    ```text
    bash TrainSet_curve_sddal.sh rec 0.0002
    ```

  - (2), Transfer the test set inference results of UNet-T trained on all different numbers of generated samples to a dedicated evaluation server where its CUDA version and environment are more convenient to compute the metric FRCM (Fourier Ring Correlation Metric):

    Open the file `scp.sh` and revise line4 to be the list of number of training samples you used just now and also indicate the IP address or domain name of the dedicated evaluation server, your user name, and the path of the folder you want to transfer the inference results into in line4. Save the change and run the following command with the beam shape you want to transfer as the only argument of `scp.sh` :

    Command:
    ```text
    bash scp.sh rec
    ```

    The progress of the inter-machine internet-based FTP file transfer will be printed in the Linux commandline.

    - (3), Run the metric calculation program on the dedicated evaluation server using the data transferred from mainframe:

    On the dedicated evaluation server, enter the folder where you just now transferred inference data into. In this GitHub repository, I give the folder `eval_fixedinit` as an example. In the folder `eval_fixedinit`, you should see that all the folders containing different inference results are already transferred in good order in there. Two other files can also be found already readily exist in the folder `eval_fixedinit`, i.e., the `FRCM.py` and `eval_all.sh`. `FRCM.py` is the script that actually calculate MAE, SSIM, and FRCM for each sample in a specific inference result folder using GPUs. `eval_all.sh` is the scheduler that automatically launch all calculation jobs for all inference result folders. Therefore, simply run the following command in the root directory of the folder `eval_fixedinit`:

    Command:
    ```text
    bash eval_all.sh
    ```

    After all evaluation jobs are finished, the MAE, SSIM, and FRCM scores for each inference result folder can be found in a log file called `evaluation.txt` in the corresponding inference result folder.

# Sanity Checks for the differentiable batched Pytorch on-GPU simulation, with Direct Integration as Convolution (DIC) as diffractive propagator, of the PBF-LB/M beam shaping system of the EOS M290 additive manufacturing machine.

- 1, Numerical accuracy: Check whether the difference between GPU-simulated (SDDAL) data and CPU-simulated (Processed InShaPe dataset) is small enough to be ignorable

   - (1) Sanity check for Initializer.py

  Operation:
  
  `Open the script Initializer.py, uncomment the code block of sanity check to enable the sanity check, and run the following command.`

  Command:
  ```text
  python3 Initializer.py --gpu 0 --init_size 100 --vis_path Design_rec
  ```
  Then you will find the absolute error maps between GPU-simulated (SDDAL) data and CPU-simulated (Processed InShaPe dataset) in the folder "./rec_sanity_check/"

  - (2) Sanity check for Scanner.py

  Operation:
  
  `Open the script Scanner.py, uncomment the code block of sanity check to enable the sanity check, and run the following command.`

  Command:
  ```text
  python3 Scanner.py --gpu 0 --batch_size 5 --pth_name QuantUNetT_rec --round_sampling 1 --vis_path Design_rec
  ```
  Please mind that you might have to first train a Quantile UNet-T by yourself first to obtain "QuantUNetT_rec.pth.tar". You will find the absolute error maps between GPU-simulated (SDDAL) data and CPU-simulated (Processed InShaPe dataset) in the folder "./rec_sanity_check/"

- 2, Differentiability: Check whether the on-GPU simulation is differntiable with respect to batched Zernike coefficients

Operation:
  
  `Switch into the folder "Official_batched_fitting_DIC_fullscene", and run the following command`
 
  Command:

  ```text
  python3 Gradient_Descent_fitting.py --gpu 0 --batch_size 2 --full_scene True
  ```

This command will start a gradient descent fitting on a batch of Zernike coefficients in the simulation to match the batch of generated intensity images as close to target intensity images (from Processed InShaPe dataset) as possible. If the fitting intensity error can converge below 0.1 (while 255 is the maximum intensity value), then we can say that the fitting is successful and the entire simulation is perfectly differentiable with respect to Zernike coefficients.

# Copyright & Citation

© 2026 Shengyuan Yan (ORCID: 0000-0002-7295-1687, Eindhoven University of Technology) & Ting Wu (Eindhoven University of Technology). All rights reserved.

If you use any part of the code or datasets released in or generated from this repository in your research, please cite the following work:

Ting Wu, Shengyuan Yan, *Continual learning with Simulation-Driven Differentiable Active Learning (SDDAL) framework for efficient phase retrieval data generation*, 2026. [GitHub Repository: Continual-SDDAL](https://github.com/yanshengyuan/Continual-SDDAL)

BibTeX format for citation:

```bibtex
@misc{yan2026sddal,
  author = {Shengyuan Yan and Ting Wu},
  title = {Continual learning with Simulation-Driven Differentiable Active Learning (SDDAL) framework for efficient phase retrieval data generation},
  year = {2026},
  howpublished = {GitHub repository},
  url = {https://github.com/yanshengyuan/Continual-SDDAL}
}
